CHAPTER 9CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCIESTHE INVENTION OF BITCOIN HAS CHANGED MONEY FOREVER AND FORCED CENTRALbanks to respond with their own iteration of cryptocurrency. Worldwide, centralbanks are preparing to launch central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) asanother second-layer monetary instrument originating from their balance sheetson par with reserves and paper currency. But nobody quite knows how CBDCswill be constructed, how similar or different their technology will be toBitcoin’s, or the impact they’ll have. This chapter will look at where centralbanks are in the process of launching their crypto-competitors, and speculate onthe interaction between CBDCs, stablecoins, and Bitcoin in the future.Change the GameCentral bankers of the Federal Reserve and an economic brain trust from aroundthe world have gathered in Jackson Hole, Wyoming since 1982 to evolve thescience and practice of central banking. At the 2019 symposium, then Governorof the Bank of England Mark Carney made a speech that delivered a diremessage about the international monetary and financial system: “In the longer-term, we need to change the game.” He bemoaned a unipolar currency regime inwhich the dollar is the sole reserve currency as unsustainable and gave life to theexploration of a post-dollar metamorphosis of money. The problem is that withlong-term changes potentially decades away, planning for them becomes anoverwhelming task. Laying new tracks for money’s future is easier said thandone.

Helicopter Money
In 2016, Ben Broadbent, a senior Bank of England official, delivered a speechtitled “Central Banks and Digital Currencies” at the London School ofEconomics that must also be catalogued into monetary history. The speech sought to touch on the following questions:What is the key innovation in private-sector digital currencies such as bitcoin? What is a ‘central bank digital currency’? And what might bethe economic implications of introducing one?The speech tried to grapple with the magnitude of Bitcoin’s innovation and itsimplications for how we think of currency, and it also took the conversationforward by admitting that central banks could use the idea of a token-baseddigital cash like Bitcoin to their own benefit by widening access to who all couldhold central bank liabilities, or second-layer money.What is the attraction of central bankers to issuing their own digitalcurrencies? The answer lies in wider access to second-layer money. Recall thatthe Federal Reserve issues two types of money, wholesale reserves for privatesector banks and retail cash for people. In order to provide monetary stimulus,the Fed issues reserves and hopes that private sector banks will use thosereserves to circulate third-layer deposits into the economy by lending money.With a CBDC, the Fed could issue second-layer money directly to people in theform of digital helicopter money; the phrase “helicopter money” comes fromMilton Friedman, who in 1969 provided the imagery of dropping cash out of ahelicopter in order to stimulate economic demand.The Fed wouldn’t necessarily be able to provide this type of economicstimulus without a larger political debate; a CBDC blurs the line between thecentral bank’s independent monetary policy and government-controlled fiscalpolicy. Helicopter money has been explored as a monetary policy tool fordecades, and with the popularity of political ideas such as Universal BasicIncome, CBDCs are the ideal vehicle to transmit direct payments to citizens inthe future.
Broadbent formally introduced the CBDC acronym that is sure to dominatethe monetary conversation for many years to come. Since his speech, the centralbanks of China, Sweden, and Australia have started testing CBDCs. TheEuropean Central Bank, Bank of England, and Federal Reserve are all severalyears into their research efforts and have all indicated that a form of central bankdigital currency is likely to arrive in the coming years. The question of whetheror not CBDCs are coming is moot.The current reality is that there are more questions than answers surroundingcentral bank digital currencies and the path they will follow. Will they be retailsecond-layer money to which the entire public has access? If that is the case,what happens to banks and their issuance of third-layer money to the public?After all, the public uses third-layer bank deposits as its primary form of money,and a retail CBDC has the potential to supplant third-layer deposits as thepreferred money-type for citizens. And from a societal standpoint, how willcentral banks use the new powers of surveillance and monetary policy thatwould emanate from the issuance of publicly accessible digital currencies?Central banks around the world are consulting industry and society on how toanswer these questions about the world of digital money.CBDC DesignWithout any official characteristics yet, CBDCs are unchartered monetaryterritory. From a layered-money perspective however, CBDCs are more defined.When issued by a central bank, digital currency will be a second-layer money, aliability on the central bank’s balance sheet alongside cash notes and reserves.The world is looking for a new multipolar game to play as Mark Carney said,and nations that want to participate in the overhaul must build their digitalcurrencies with specific characteristics.Central banks first have to decide which liability they want their digitalcurrencies to emulate more: wholesale reserves or retail cash. The conversationdemands a layered-money context in order to achieve clarity around thisimportant and foundational decision for digital currency issuance.
When people use cash, they are using second-layer money and avoiding thebanking layer altogether. But most people don’t use cash anymore. They usebank deposits and payment platforms linked to bank accounts for their dailyinteraction with money, which occurs on the third and lower layers. Centralbanks are wary of the effects on the banking industry of launching digitalcurrencies. With this new technology, they have the opportunity to activelyreduce the role of banks in the issuance of money; if CBDCs are accessible tothe entire populace, people might reduce their reliance on bank accounts toreceive direct deposits and pay bills.Alternatively, central banks could issue a digital currency in the form ofwholesale reserves, which would only be accessible to banks. The digitalreserves option has the potential to modernize financial infrastructure for thebanking system, but it won’t impact how society interacts with money.Will central banks issue a retail CBDC or a wholesale CBDC? We’ll see someattempt one or the other, and some attempt both. A wholesale CBDC doesn’tbring into question the displacement of banks. It’s also probably the best way forcentral banks to test new technology in a live environment with select banks asusers instead of with millions of people. A retail CBDC has the potential tochange the concept of monetary policy itself by giving central banks the abilityto interact with people directly instead of only with other banks. Different centralbanks will choose different paths.ChinaGeopolitical tensions between China and the United States have risen over thepast several years and will continue to do so as China fosters its desire to be theworld’s superpower. Through its Belt and Road initiative, a worldwide tradeinfrastructure network with over one hundred nations participating, China isspreading its influence and its currency denomination across the globe.But China’s rise is unquestionably missing a corresponding deep and liquidcapital market for its currency denomination, especially when it comes to a risk-free asset. China’s government bond market is but a blip on the international
radar of liquid and safe securities, but more importantly, China’s currencydenomination renminbi (RMB, “people’s currency”) which began with thefounding of the People’s Bank of China in 1948, is not a freely traded currency.Trade between RMB and other currencies is largely restricted by the Chinesegovernment, exchange rates are managed instead of market-driven, andconvertibility between RMB and the world’s reserve currency, USD, is far fromseamless. The renminbi, despite all recent attempts by China atinternationalizing the currency, remains a closed capital account. This means thatcompanies and banks can’t freely move renminbi in and out of the country,negating any demand for RMB as a world reserve currency. Nevertheless, Chinais preparing for a post-dollar world. During the few years after the 2008 financialcrisis, China instituted direct cross-currency relationships with some of its alliesin order to reduce its dependence on using the USD as a clearing mechanism forinternational trade. This started with China’s 2011 agreement with Russia andcontinued as it looked for alternatives to the global dollar standard.The People’s Bank of China is already live-testing a digital renminbi systemcalled Digital Currency Electronic Payment (DCEP) in select cities with alimited number of citizens and businesses participating in the first stage of therollout. China is moving forward with an entire legal framework for DCEP as itlooks to jump out ahead in the global CBDC race that is only just beginning.China will likely use its digital RMB as a tool to grow its global influence andspread the adoption of its denomination. When fully implemented, DCEP carriesthe potential to be the largest financial surveillance operation in the world,especially if it forces its major trading partners into using DCEP to transact withChinese entities. One of the most important details of China’s legal frameworkinterestingly forbids the issuance of RMB-backed digital tokens by private sectorbanks, or RMB stablecoins. This will be a distinguishing trait of China’s CBDC,as China might be transitioning to a financial system without third-layer bankdeposits and drive all of its citizens into its second-layer retail CBDC instead.Digital Euro
The European Central Bank published a “Report on a Digital Euro” in October2020 and demonstrated full intent to take its currency denomination digital. Thereport concluded that a “digital euro may even become essential in a number ofpossible scenarios,” an admission that the merger of the monetary andcryptography sciences is official and fundamentally changing the world’smonetary order. The report is filled with more questions than answers about thedigital euro, like how a CBDC would impact the second- and third-layerrelationship between the ECB and European private sector banks, whether itwould coexist with paper currency or replace it altogether, and what it wouldmean for monetary policy itself. Private sector banks are threatened by CBDCsbecause of their potential to displace the demand for bank deposits, and the ECBappears eager to strike the right balance. According to the report, the ECB seemsready to launch a digital euro project and full technical exploration phase in2021.FedcoinCurrent Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell addressed a possible Fedcoin, anickname given to the Federal Reserve’s prospective digital currency, during anInternational Monetary Fund conference in 2020:It’s more important for the United States to get it right than to be first. Weare committed to carefully and thoughtfully evaluating the potential costsand benefits of a central bank digital currency for the U.S. economy andpayments system. We have not made a decision to issue a CBDC.Although no concrete plans exist for Fedcoin, the Federal Reserve is clearlyon track to create one in due course, if not because of the continued success ofBitcoin, then due to the sudden realization that it might be the last major centralbank in the world to release one. The Fed, based on indications from China andEurope, is already going to be late to the CBDC party. It is unlikely to issue aretail CBDC that could be used by the public as a form of digital notes right
away; instead, it will conceivably create a form of digital bank reserves in orderto test the technology before eventually launching a publicly available, retail-facing Fedcoin. Figure 17 shows how a Fedcoin would be a second-layer moneyalongside reserves and cash.Figure 17BTC and CBDC Price RelationshipThe underlying thesis of this book is that BTC will stand alone on the first-layerof money in the future. If only one word about Bitcoin could be used to describewhy, we’d have to choose one coined only a few years ago in 2014 by authorand seminal economic thinker Nassim Nicholas Taleb: antifragile. Here is howTaleb defined it:
Some things benefit from shocks; they thrive and grow when exposed tovolatility, randomness, disorder, and stressors and love adventure, risk,and uncertainty. Yet, in spite of the ubiquity of the phenomenon, there isno word for the exact opposite of fragile. Let us call it antifragile.Antifragility is beyond resilience or robustness. The resilient resistsshocks and stays the same; the antifragile gets better.Bitcoin is antifragile because it thrives off global monetary disorder within thedollar pyramid and is resilient to the threats, slander, and legislation fromdismissive bureaucratic entities. The plain truth about Bitcoin is that nobodycontrols it. It has become the first-ever government-free, universally accessibledigital currency. And for these reasons, all currencies in the purely digital realmwill face price discovery in BTC terms. This means that all digital currencies,from cryptocurrencies to CBDCs, will be measured in BTC, just like the BrettonWoods agreement in 1944 mandated all currencies be measured in USD. Figure18 elucidates a future in which BTC is the world reserve currency and only first-layer money.
Figure 18In order for this type of BTC-denominated layered money system to evolve, afew technological details need to fall into place that might sound far-fetched butare already in development within central banks today. The last piece of thepuzzle on the path to BTC becoming world reserve currency will be the atomicswap.Atomic SwapsUnderstanding the atomic swap and its role in the future of money requires theamalgamation of three elements discussed in this book: Lightning Network,Hashed TimeLock Contracts (HTLCs), and Distributed Ledger Technology(DLT). We’ll quickly review the key aspects of each, and then show how they allfit together. Lightning Network is a network of BTC users that can transactinstantly with each other instead of having to wait ten minutes for the next block
to be mined. This is possible thanks to smart contracts called HTLCs. Separately,Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) is a term that mainstream academia andcentral bank research departments use to describe Bitcoin-inspired software.Now here’s how all the terms are bound together. DLT software equipped withHTLCs that are compatible with Bitcoin’s Lightning Network will be used bycentral banks to launch their CBDCs. If the smart contracts are compatibleacross digital assets, it would enable a world of atomic swaps.An atomic swap is, at its core, a trade. It’s a smart contract that allows for thetrade between digital currencies without using a third-party exchange. This isabsolutely revolutionary in the world of finance and trading, and let’s use anexample of buying shares of Apple to illustrate why. Say you want to purchase100 shares of Apple at $100 each. You deposit $10,000 into a stock exchange.Those wanting to sell their shares will deposit them as well. The exchange isrequired in this situation to ensure that both the buyer and the seller have themoney and assets necessary to complete the trade. Without a third party, traderswould have to trust each other every time they traded. But with an exchange, thatis not the case.Atomic swaps fundamentally change these basic ideas of trading. They areprogrammed to execute the trade for both parties or for neither, eliminatingcounterparty risk, exchange risk, and default risk altogether. It’s important tounderstand that atomic swaps will only work on central bank digital currenciesthat are built using DLT software outfitted with the same type of smart contractspresent in Bitcoin’s Lightning Network. However, this doesn’t necessarily meanthat a central bank issuing a CBDC on a distributed ledger would cede anycontrol over the underlying currency.Several implementations of DLT already allow for atomic swaps. Here is areal-life example of the work being done on atomically swappable central bankdigital currencies. In 2019, the Monetary Authority of Singapore, the Bank ofCanada, JP Morgan, and Accenture announced a successful atomic swapbetween Canadian dollars (CAD) and Singapore dollars (SGD) across twoseparate DLT platforms using HTLCs “without the need for a third party that is
trusted by both jurisdictions.” The transaction’s setup was incrediblycomplicated from a software programming and computer science standpoint andtook much time and care to execute, but this is the type of research monetaryauthorities around the world are conducting right now to explore the future ofmoney. The Canadian central bank used a DLT called Corda, and Singapore’scentral bank used a DLT called Quorum, both solutions offered as products byprivate enterprises. The two DLTs have several fundamental differences but arecompatible where it counts: they allow for HTLCs with each other. Centralbanks will need an increasingly large applied-cryptography contingent amongsttheir senior ranks in order to iron out all the technical details to CBDCimplementation. Whether they decide to use a banking software solution, analternative cryptocurrency, or Bitcoin itself, central banks have an array ofoptions when it comes to their ultimate launch of digital currencies. If centralbanks want their digital currencies to thrive in the Bitcoin era, they will issueCBDCs that use DLT software with HTLC capabilities in order to join theatomic swap club. With BTC as the only first-layer digital currency, every otherdigital currency, no matter how powerful the issuer, will ultimately be measuredagainst BTC.

CHAPTER 10FREEDOM OF CURRENCY DENOMINATION

SINCE THE CREATION OF THE BANK OF AMSTERDAM IN THE SEVENTEENTH century, monetary instruments and governments have been linked to each other.But in the digital age, money and state don’t necessarily mix anymore. To many,the entire concept of government money is becoming obsolete as the rise ofBitcoin bellows in antithesis. Because Bitcoin is software, mathematics, andspeech, it should be considered a human right. Bitcoin embodies freedom ofcurrency denomination because it gives people the ability to denominate theirearnings and savings away from government association. Whether people havechanged their unit of account to BTC from their local currencies because ofpolitical ideals, nonviolent protest, or a belief that technology enables a novelform of money, they are naturally endowed with the freedom to choose how thefruits of their labor are measured. Bitcoin gives people around the world the firstgenuine alternative to their national currencies, a trend which is impossible toreverse now that over 100 million people own it globally.

A Vision of the Future
Here’s an outline of how our monetary future might play out in the context oflayered money. Today, central banks employ trading desks in order to buy andsell their currency in the foreign exchange market in hopes to maintain exchangerate stability. In the near future, they’ll add BTC trading capabilities to their openmarket operations in hopes to guide their digital currency’s exchange rate inBTC terms.Bitcoin has caused a seismic shift in the monetary balance of power awayfrom governments, even as central bank digital currencies wait in the wings.China will launch its CBDC in preparation for the 2022 Winter Olympics. The
European Central Bank, Federal Reserve, and other major central banks will betesting CBDCs by then and will follow with launches of their own.Banks will issue stablecoins that offer advantages to holding CBDCs, such ashigher interest rates or cash-back membership benefits. If friction is minimalwhen trading between one digital currency and another thanks to atomic swaps,the stablecoin universe will thrive as the source of credit elasticity, or lending.Banks will issue loans, record them as assets on their balance sheet, and issuestablecoins instead of deposits as liabilities. Banks can dramatically increasetransparency and rejuvenate trustworthiness by using DLT, and transition to adynamic balance sheet that allows the investing public to see live capital ratiosinstead of heavily window-dressed static quarterly reporting. In order to join themonetary order of the future, banks must issue stablecoins that are atomicallyswappable with other stablecoins, CBDCs, and BTC. Banks will become mastersof the atomic swap, making markets between digital currencies in order topursue arbitrage and generate profit. With atomic swaps and instant settlementbetween digital currencies, a path forward exists for the transition to a Bitcoin-anchored monetary system.Governments and corporations around the world will purchase BTC and holdit as a cash reserve because it reduces reliance on the current dollar system,indicating that the era of global dollar denomination is eroding in the direction ofcryptocurrency, instead of any other government currency like the renminbi oreuro. Gold will continue to serve as a trusted neutral money, but it has norealistic capability to serve as the rails for a digital financial system. This is notto dismiss gold as the best form of counterparty-free money the world has everknown: Bitcoin has only captured 6% of gold’s total worldwide market value.Furthermore, gold’s international monetary role has returned with a vengeancesince 2007; central banks around the world have increased gold asset holdingsdramatically as a hedge to the dollar system’s instability and fragility. Gold isconsidered an insurance on monetary disorder and disarray, one that tends towork best during earthquakes in the dollar pyramid. But gold’s physicality fallsshort in a digital world where Bitcoin thrives. Eventually, Bitcoin will likely
replace gold as the most desired neutral money and exceed it in total marketvalue.For the public, all money will be digital tokens that will be held in digitalwallets. People will simultaneously hold an assortment of currencies: BTC for aneutrality, CBDCs for paying taxes and collecting benefits, and stablecoins forearning interest. Many will rely on second-layer CBDCs and do away with third-layer bank deposits altogether. A growing number of people will surviveexclusively on non-government cryptocurrencies like BTC and never subjectthemselves to counterparty risk.

Money of Choice
Our multipolar world is looking for a monetary rebirth, and Bitcoin offersexactly that. Countries will resist, and some central bankers and politicians willsucceed at keeping Bitcoin out of their countries because it threatens their power.But freedom of currency denomination will eventually emerge, whether it comesfrom banking havens in Europe, offshore money centers in the Caribbean, or theUnited States of America itself. Gone will be the days when an individual onlyuses the currency of the country where he or she resides. No currency in thedigital realm will ever be able to prove itself as resistant to corruption as BTC,wherein transactions once confirmed are impossible to override, making Bitcointhe ultimate tool of financial freedom anywhere in the world. Bitcoin is wherethe Internet collides with money to bring about change in the sametransformative way it did with communication and commerce.Looking back at Bitcoin’s origin through a layered lens, we can see that a newfirst-layer money had been invented. It was something the world desperatelyneeded, and we are only beginning to understand its impact. In the future, thecurrency you use will not merely reflect your birthplace or country of residence,but your preferences. Use this map of layered money to emancipate yourselffrom the boundaries of traditional finance and explore a world of currencieswithout geographical confinements. Reference the layered money design to seeexactly where your money exists in the monetary landscape and empower
yourself to achieve freedom of currency denomination by navigating towardyour money of choice.
